The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gott betet, by Mechtild Lichnowsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Gott betet

Author: Mechtild Lichnowsky

Release Date: September 20, 2014 [EBook #46908]

Language: German

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOTT BETET ***




Produced by Jens Sadowski





                         MECHTILD LICHNOWSKY




                              GOTT BETET


                         KURT WOLFF / VERLAG

                  BÜCHEREI »DER JÜNGSTE TAG« BAND 56

            DRUCK DER SPAMERSCHEN BUCHDRUCKEREI IN LEIPZIG




I


Ich beuge mein Haupt in vollkommener Liebe zu Dir, o Mensch, ich beuge
es, denn ich fühle kein Leid.

Du aber lebst davon und erfandest die Freude.

Ich bete zu Dir. Das ist die vollkommene Liebe.

Ich erflehe nichts. Deine Arbeit erwarte ich nicht.

Ich klage mich nicht an. Der Strom meiner Liebe zu Dir ist einer Säule
gleich, fließend und unbewegt.

Beten ist Lieben. So bete ich Dich an. So bete ich zu Dir, lieber
Mensch, denn Du bist allgütig und unsichtbar.

Wer weiß von Dir?

Du selbst nicht. Und die andern nicht.

Du siehst Dich nicht. Du atmest den Wohlgeruch nicht, der aus der Tiefe
Deines Seelenkelches zu mir dringt.

Schöner warmer Kelch. Dein Leben perlt an den goldenen Wänden.

Und außerhalb des Bechers steht ein kühler Schweiß, der mich erbarmt.

Ich trinke Dich zur Neige in vollkommener Liebe.

Du liebst meine Geschöpfe. Ich fühle es, wenn ich Dich trinke.

Du fandest eine Sprache im Wind, den ich rief um meine Welt zu trocknen,
als ich sie schuf. Ich höre Deine Musik, wenn ich Dich trinke.

Du griffst nach meinen Sonnenstrahlen, die ich brach zu Deinem
Spielzeug. Ich begrüße die tausend Farben in Dir, wenn ich Dich trinke.

Du hast mit deinen kleinen Händen meine Erde gehalten und ihre Formen
gefühlt. Und zu mir sprachst Du in dieser Sprache.

Ich fühle Deine Hände, wenn ich Dich trinke.

Vielmals vielfach gibst Du mir in Liebkosung meine Liebe wieder. Dich
liebst Du nicht. Spielst nicht mit Dir. Lebst nicht für Dich. Du bist
ein anderer als Du selbst.

Aber keiner soll Dich für einen andern halten. Ich will Dich mit meiner
Liebe zeichnen. Alle sollen an Dich glauben. So will es meine Liebe.

Du bist still und demütig. Und doch ist Dein Stolz weiß und hart wie
meine Schneegebirge.

Du senkst die Augen und glaubst nicht ihrem Leuchten. Ich aber baue
darauf einen Tempel. Kein Stern verzehrt blauere Funken als Deines
Herzens Herd mir zum Genusse sendet.




II


Du mein höchstes, geliebtestes Werk. Ich danke Dir, daß Du mit Deinem
Schöpfer geduldig bist.

Ich könnte vor Dich treten und mich Dir zeigen.

Und doch bitte ich Dich, erlasse mir dieses.

Denn sähest Du mich, verlörest Du den Glauben an meine Gegenwart.

Unsichtbar, lieber, geliebter Mensch, hülle ich Dich mit jedem Atem
tiefer in meine Gedanken ein. So bin ich Dir nahe. Denn ich durchdringe
in Dir Falten, die meine Sichtbarkeit erdrücken würden.

Und auf diese Falten habe ich es in meiner Liebe zu Dir abgesehen. Nicht
weil Du Dich mir hingibst, lieber Mensch, lodert in mir eine unendliche
Liebe zu Dir. Nicht weil Dich der Boden quält, auf dem Du stehst. Nicht
weil Du mich fürchtest, zu mir sprichst, mir opferst, mich rufst, mein
Lob verkündest:

Ich liebe Dich, weil ich Dich voraussah.

Ich liebe Dich, weil Du mir gerietest.

Ich nenne Dich vollkommen schön und fürchte die Veränderung.

Darum liebe ich Dich: Ich bin ein Gott, der furchtsam ist aus Liebe. Und
todesmutig aus Liebe.

Schön bist Du, weil Du alles bist.

Deine Mattheit kann aufleuchten. Deine Helligkeit aus tiefster Schwärze
steigen. Alle Gesetze sind in Dir erfüllt.

Der Tod fände in Dir höchstes Leben.

Wie ein Hündchen kannst Du hinter der Herde laufen, wie ein König auf
Purpur lehnen. Wie ein Sträfling kannst Du Wellen mit den Rudern teilen,
wie eine Lerche Melodien in den Äther schneiden. Deine Hand kann
verträumt im Sande spielen und kann Gaben austeilen und Gerechtigkeit
üben ohne Gesetze. Du kannst schlagen und töten. Du kannst gebären und
aufrichten.

Als Deine Mutter Dich trug, liebte ich Dich. Als Dein Vater Deine Mutter
ansah, liebte ich Dich. Als Deine Eltern, einander unbekannt, auf meiner
Erde kindhaft spielten, liebte ich Dich.

Als hundert Jahre früher, ein Jüngerer von Deiner Menschenkraft träumte,
Dich fliegen, herrschen und zeugen sah, siehe, auch da liebte ich. Denn
schon fühlte ich Dich. Fühlte Dich zittern in Deiner Mutter Schoß. Wußte
daß Dein Fliegen ein Gehen und ein Schauen sein werde.

Als Deine Mutter in Dir nur ihr Junges erkannte, und Dein Vater keinen
Unterschied wahrnahm zwischen Dir und Deinen Brüdern, liebte ich Dich.
Stark liebte ich da, denn Du konntest darauf nicht achten.

Schön warst Du, und willig wie eine Quelle und pochtest still.

Hilflos warst Du wie sie alle sind, abhängig von Menschenlaune wie vom
Zug der Wolken. Deine Nahrung konnte Gift sein. Du hättest sie verzehrt,
so arm warst Du an Kräften, nicht wie ein Tier mit Witterung und
Triebespflichten, sondern wie ein Mensch, gefüllt mit Vertrauen und
Torheit.




III


Niemand liebte Deinen kleinen Körper. Wie es nötig erschien, pflegten
ihn die Großen. Ich war mitten unter ihnen. Sie sahen mich nicht. Und
das war gut, denn meine Sprache wäre die ihre nicht gewesen.

So aber hätte ich gesprochen:

»Seht das Wunder dieses Körpers an, und seid voll Andacht. Ihr kränkt
die kleinen Glieder, weil Ihr vergeßt, einen Augenblick vergeßt, sechzig
Augenblicke, Tage, Jahre lang vergeßt, daß jedes Kind so schön ist wie
die Blumen, von welchen Ihr erfuhrt, daß man sie ihrer Schönheit wegen
loben müsse.«

»Wir küssen und baden sie.«

»Ihr sollt das Wunder nicht unheilig berühren.«

»Wir küssen es, denn es ist unser.«

»O wartet, daß es EUCH küßt, denn IHR seid sein.«

Siehe, geliebter Mensch, so wären Worte blind aneinander geglitten.

Ich aber liebte Deine schmalen glatten Fußsohlen, die Dich unentwegt
über Holz und Stein und Erde trugen, bis Du müde wurdest, auch wenn sie
lind von taugelabten Wiesen berührt waren.

Wer wusch sie Dir mit Quellenwasser, mit Saft aus der Zitrone und lauem
Milchschaum?

Ich liebte Deine müde gelaufenen Sohlen, die Siegel in den Sand meiner
Erde setzten. Das ist Deine Ursprache, Mensch.

In meine Hände mochte ich Deine Füße betten, sie drücken und freigeben
und nicht eher ruhen, als bis das Blut wieder ruhig in ihnen fließe.

Tritt auf meine Hand, Mensch. Ich will Dich in ewigem Schwung erhalten.

Auch ich mußte wandern. In Tausenden von Jahren wirst Du ein Tausendstel
zählen können der Zeit, die Dein Gott gewandert. Und daß er nichts
hatte, sein Haupt darauf zu legen, steht geschrieben.




IV


Dann lerntest Du zu gehen.

Öffnetest ein geduldiges Auge über den Dingen. Und sie blickten hinein,
hielten es über sich aus. Und wenn es sie befragte, gaben sie Antwort.
Du aber legtest was Du gewonnen in Dein Herz, namenlos, wie es gekommen.

Darum wurde es so voll, und weil die Fülle namenlos eintrat, mußtest Du
verschwiegsam bleiben.

O daß ich Dir Leid schicken mußte, jungfräulich, schuldloser Mensch! Ich
sah Dich krank auf dem Kinderlager, und unter diamantenen Fingern fühlte
ich Dein Knabenherz zerspringen.

Ich wußte die Schmerzen Deiner Glieder und nahm sie nicht von Dir,
grausamer, wachsam liebender Gott.

Ich schlug den Arm Dir nicht um Schultern und Lenden und richtete Dich
nicht auf zu prangender Gesundheit.

Schwach ließ ich Dich, dem Schmerze preisgegeben. Du aber schaltest
nicht auf mich, den grausam liebenden Gott.

Unendlich gütig warst Du zu mir, lieber Mensch, als hättest Du geahnt,
daß ich in Liebe handelte.




V


Als ich aus meiner Werkstatt Dich entließ, Du mein fertiges Kind, blieb
ich mit meinem Flügelschlage ein weniges zurück, Dir Raum zu geben. Mein
Schwung hielt inne, und Du entfaltetest Dich. Du wurdest. O Du bliebst
eine Pflanze nach Deines Meisters Herzen.

Offen warst Du wie ein Windenkelch im Mittagsleuchten, vollendet wie der
Tautropfen, der am Morgengrase hängt, und blendend wie die Sonne selbst
und tatest keinem Auge weh. Du warst ein geschlossenes Stücklein Gottes.

Ich aber wollte den Menschen.

Da legte ich Dich, süßeste Beere, buntester Vogel, Falter meines
Gartens, auf ein Menschenlager.

Die Buntheit wich von Dir. Dein Singen wurde ein schweres Ringen um
Atem. Und Deine Brust hob sich wie eines zu engen Käfiges Stäbe über das
Bebende eines Zugvögleins.

Deine Gelenke berührte der Finger des grausamen, wachsam liebenden
Gottes.

Ich klage mich an, daß ich Dich Mensch werden ließ.

Und Dich dem Leide weihte.

Und keiner sah Dein Ringen und jeder überhörte Dein Rufen.

Nur ich vernahm Dein armes Singen. Und ich fand es schöner als Dein
Lächeln, das noch kaum gefärbt war.

Du liebtest mich, Du Kind ohne Selbst, ohne Furcht.

Als endlich meine Hand Dich aufstehen ließ, warst Du gewachsen.

Und stiller warst Du und einsamer geworden.

Mir näher. Denn Deiner Gefährten Glieder, behender als Deine, wenn sie
über Wege setzten, ließen Dich weit zurück. Sie trugen ihre Lasten
leicht.

Ich aber legte schwer meine Hand auf Deinen jungen Rücken und beugte ihn
tief.

Wenn andere noch schliefen, standest Du, Schlafes voll, in der trübsten,
ersten Helligkeit des Morgens von Deinem Lager auf und trugst Dich zur
Arbeitsstätte.

Und so hieltest Du es Tag um Tag.

Und Nacht um Nacht lagst Du wie ein Stein in den Laken, jungfräulich in
allem wie an Freuden.

Ich sah Dich so, fest verschlossen, und zählte die Seufzer Deiner Brust.
Niemand liebte Dich wie ich. Dein Gott strebte zu Dir. Wer sonst hat
Deinen Atem geliebt?

O gedenke nicht in Bitterkeit meiner Hand.

Muß eine Hand nicht geben können und nehmen?

Und ich zählte die Schritte Deiner schmalen Sohlen auf dem Granit der
Stadt.

Dein Kopf war leer, Deine Lider tief herabgefaltet. Nie öffnetest Du den
Mund. Ich ließ es zu.

Ich ließ Dich, kannst Du es begreifen?

Ich verwehrte dem Lachen Deine Schwelle.

Ich hielt die Strahlen des Glücks zurück, ich zügelte mein Verlangen Dir
alle Geschöpfe meines Gartens darzubringen: Die Tiere des Waldes, die
Vögel, meine Steine, meine fernen Hügel, die Musik meiner Bienen, die
Düfte aller Jahreszeiten, der Tanz meiner Winde über den Gräsern und
Libellen.

Erst solltest Du ihre Sprache kennen.

O, ich trug mein volles Herz von Dir hinweg.

Kannst Du, Mensch, Deinen Gott noch lieben?

Ich nahm Dir die Luft, ich nahm Dir das Brot, ich warf dichte Schatten
über Dich.

Du ertrugst Deinen Gott. Und Du wurdest immer schöner. Dein Herz weitete
sich.

Es pochte ängstlich und ich ließ es wachsen.

Die Menschenärzte sahen es und überließen Dich mir, nachdem sie die
Köpfe geschüttelt hatten.

Und Du wurdest noch schöner.

Deine Stimme wurde Samt und Deine Augen. Sie taten wie ein Wald, und
andere mußten schweigen, als seien sie unter Tannen.

Ich aber sandte Dir ein Mädchen.

Und Du wurdest erfüllt von meiner Abgesandten.

Wie sie Dich erfüllte, wuchs Dein Herz. Sie selbst aber blieb fern und
ihre Augen suchten die Deinen nicht.

Ich wollte Dir die Liebe zeigen, und Du fandest sie. Dann solltest Du
mich sehen von Angesicht.

Und Du lerntest.

Mit einem Male wußtest Du was der Weihrauch weiß:

Brennen, Steigen und Vergehen.

Und ein süßer Duft blieb.

O, Du erlerntest die einzige Kunst, wie ich es vorausgeahnt.

Du branntest, eine Glut ohne Asche.

Alles gabst Du den Flammen hin. Und als Du zu geben nicht mehr hattest,
verdoppeltest Du Dein Selbst und gabst es neu.

Und so wurden zwei aus Dir, drei und mehr und immer neue, und so wurdest
Du leise ein Gott und fandest Unendlichkeit.

O, wie kamst Du mir da nahe!




VI


Ich aber zog das Mädchen hinweg, das niemals die Augen nach Dir
gerichtet.

Als legte jemand Eisstücke auf den singenden Weihrauch, branntest Du in
aufgestöberter Glut, verwirrt, und keiner sah die zitternden Funken. Du
wärmtest Keinen.

Keinen außer Deinen Gott.

Und siehe, Deine Arbeit wurde wie Stahl in Gold aus dieser Glut.

Und die Menschen fielen um vor Dir, und weil sie Dich nicht lieben
mochten, schätzten sie Deiner Arbeit Wert.

Noch hattest Du die Sprache nicht. Dein Mund litt wie ein Herz.

Auch ihm war der Schrei nicht gegeben.

Deinen Schrei hielt ich an meine Brust gepreßt und liebte Dich, Mensch.

Fast wärest Du meiner Hand entfallen. In letzter Stunde sandte ich Dir
den Freund.

Aus tiefster Not hat er Dich errettet.

Nun stiegst Du hoch in Arbeit. Fremde Sorgen wurden die Deinen.

Die Liebe ließ Dich nicht allein. Sie wohnte bei Dir, und füllte Dein
trauriges Herz.

Du bliebst von Gott gezeichnet.

Du behieltest einen stillen Glanz wie ihn Sterne tragen.

Und um Dich kreisten die Menschen.




VII


Von den Verteilern erhält nicht jeder gleiches Maß. Wie aber, wenn, der
geringstes erhielt, noch mit seinem Hunde teilt, oder meinen Vögeln ein
kleines streut?

Gütig ist der Grund Deines Herzens, Mensch, der Du täglich mir von
Deinem Brote sprichst, mich bittest, und mir dankst. Um Brot, für Brot.

Und der Weizen steht und prangt, und die Mühlen gehen und mahlen und Ihr
backt und verteilt.

Und Ihr praßt und Ihr hungert. Zu diesem Allem schweigt Gott.

Gott nenne ich EUCH, da Ihr mich entsetzt. Unermeßlich seid Ihr, und
auch darum nenne ich Euch Gott: Unermeßlich ist Eure Menge.

Ihr seid zu groß, um meiner zu gedenken. Zu erfüllt seid Ihr.

So erfüllt, daß es aus Euch quillt.

Was aus Euch dringt, kenne ich nicht mehr, aber fruchtbarer scheint Ihr
mir als Wiesen an Wurzeln, als Meere an Muscheln, als Wolken an Tropfen.

Sprache nennt Ihr, was aus Euch quillt, Werke, was Eure Hände verläßt,
Weg, was Eure Fußtapfen verdrängten.

Ich aber nenne Euch untätig und redesüchtig.

Ward ich Euch Kreatur? Und seid Ihr Gott? Bin ich erblindet?

Um ein Nichts seid Ihr in ein Meer von Angst versetzt.

Was zeigt Ihr nicht wie die Pferde, Eine Linie, Ein Verhalten, essend,
gehend, horchend, Eine durchgehende Windung ohne Unterbrechen?

Warum seid Ihr nicht mehr ein Stiel mit Blüten und Früchten?

Wer gab Euch die runden Schädel ohne Seiten?

Wer zog die ausgeschweiften Münder?

Wer gab Euch die umgestellten Beine? Die schweren, blutigen Hände?

O, was wurde aus dem Werk?

Stündlich entreißet Ihr Euch meiner Zärtlichkeit.

So weit seid Ihr von Gottes Hand geraten.

Ihr findet ihre Ufer niemals wieder.

Weil Ihr die Schönheit meidet.

So stellt Euch der Tod.

Ich nenne Euch Gott, weil Ihr unermeßlich seid in Eurer Menge.

Du aber, göttlich geliebter Mensch, meines Herzens, sollst den Hauch
meiner Liebe spüren.

Mir sind Deine täglichen Wege vertraut. Ich kenne Deine Müdigkeit, auch
Deine Mutlosigkeit, die Dich stumm werden ließ.

Nun sollst Du nicht nur sprechen, ich will Dich singen lehren.

Nun sollen geöffnet werden für Dich die Jahreszeiten, die Halme mit
ihren Knospen, die friedlichen Augen der Tiere, alle Pfeifen meiner
Orgel, alle Felsen, woraus Quellen springen.

Nun sollen auch geöffnet werden die Hände eines zweiten Menschen.

Vereint wollen wir zu Dir beten, der Zweite und ich, Dein Gott.

Vereint wollen wir Dich in Glück betten.

Und nie sollst Du wissen, ob Dein Gott gesprochen oder Dein zweiter
Mensch.

Und Du sollst an uns glauben ohne Furcht.

Nie soll der Schatten des Unwahren Deine Schwelle kreuzen.

Siehe, die Liebe ist wahr wie Gott.




VIII


Noch einmal will ich zu Dir beten, geliebter Mensch. Damit Du nie
verlernst, was Du heute wußtest: daß ich Dich bis zum Abgrund liebe, und
vom Abgrund bis zur Sonne.

Daß ich Dein stilles Menschenantlitz grüße, weil es wie mein eignes
wurde.

Ich konnte Dich nur formen nach meinem Ebenbild. Nur dieses Gefäß ist
mir wahr.

Mein Werk mußte werden wie ich selbst, weil auch die Hände nur ihr
Gesicht wieder bilden können.

Ein Kreis ist des Menschen Sein und Gesinnung.

Darum verdirbt, der nicht zur Ausgangsstelle zurückfindet.

Darum lügt, dessen Hand nicht formt nach ihrem Munde.

Darum stirbt, der sich nicht zum heiligen Kreis biegen kann.

Du aber, lieber Unendlicher, wirst mir leben.

Um Deinetwillen muß ich die Menschheit lieben. Wie ich sie lieben mußte,
als ich noch auf Dich hoffte.

Du sollst mein Herr sein. Du sollst Gottes Hand führen.

Wie Du sie gefühlt hast.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gott betet, by Mechtild Lichnowsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOTT BETET ***

***** This file should be named 46908-8.txt or 46908-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/9/0/46908/

Produced by Jens Sadowski
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

